in New Jersey is one of the several
states that are taking some steps toward
reopening the state's governor Phil
Murphy says parks and golf courses are
now open however the stay-at-home order
remains in effect
Murphy met with President Trump at the
White House on Thursday saying the state
could need between twenty to thirty
billion dollars in federal financial
assistance
I spoke with Trump senior advisor Kevin
Hassett last night about potential plans
to help the states well I think that
first what's going on is that some of
the states are under the guidelines from
doctors Burks and pouchy and the rest of
the task force opening up and doing so
in a cautious stepwise manner if you
know the virus were to go away at a
relatively quick amount of time then a
lot of states could safely follow the
guidelines and March through the phases
and then the economy would turn back on
a lot earlier in which case it could be
that the amount of stimulus we put in
right now is enough this is definitely
taking longer than many people thought
and the phase four deal would of course
have to address the problems with states
because since we've turned the economy
off we've turned you know a lot of
incomes off so that means that those
folks aren't necessarily paying taxes
and so there's a massive crater well
acid also told me that he thinks that
the Senate Majority Leader Mitch
McConnell's recent idea to let States go
bankrupt is unconstitutional and won't
happen joining me now is the mayor of
Teaneck New Jersey Mohamed Hamidah Dean
and about seventy miles south of that on
i-95 is William Rogers the third
professor of public policy and chief
economist at the Heldrich Center for
Workforce Development at Rutgers
University bill served as chief
economist at the US Labor Department
from 2000 to 2001 and later on as
President Obama's Labor Department
transition team member he's now part of
governor Murphy's Commission to help get
the state up and running more than 123
New Jersey residents have been diagnosed
with kovat 19 more than 7,700 have died
mayor Hamidi now let me start with you
what's the situation for you in Teaneck
you certainly had a pretty scary
experience with coronavirus
has that pulled back at all yes we've
seen the rate of infection slowing down
we've seen the rate of hospitalization
sewing down our hospitals have catched
caught up with PPEs
front lines of workers have protective
equipment now so we are on a level where
we feel confident that we can fight this
disease and manage but that's only
because people are adhering to social
distancing and sheltering in place bill
let's talk about this pivot to the
economic message
Teaneck is going to be like every other
place in New Jersey cities can't go into
deficits states can't go into deficits
and they can't print their own money but
states because everybody's sitting at
home are also short of money so there's
a bit of a distinction when the federal
government doesn't get money they have
other options if they don't get revenue
from taxes when states don't get money
from taxes they have far fewer options
that's your most you're correct and you
know the challenge with you know states
like New Jersey where you know we have
you know been really at the epicenter of
of the the virus the outbreak you know
is that this is going to have kids
creating a cascading effect that just as
their families are having challenges now
they're gonna have challenges into the
next few months because you know they
have they've gone without paychecks or
like you know the Pew Research ziva they
published just the other day that only
1/3 of people who were surveyed that are
that have applied for unemployment
insurance have received it and so you
know you're just we're just pushing this
the hurt down the road to where in this
in the summer and into the fall when we
move into the next fiscal year you're
going to see some large cuts I mean at
Rutgers when I'm a professor the the the
current president barchi who's leaving
you know he's talking about cuts of over
you know 15 20 percent and you know
those cuts are magnified when you go
down to to a local locality or
municipality like Tina and other in like
the borough that I live in we call
Hopewell a mayor how many tell me how
this trickles down
to you first of all how is teen ex
revenue affected because on one hand you
get property revenue in other other
forms of Taxation but you you get a
certain amount of funding from the state
so what happens in Teaneck if there's a
twenty to thirty billion dollar
shortfall in New Jersey luckily we've
been very well managed over the last six
years we have a surplus our biggest tax
payer played on May 1st so we're having
a meeting next week to extend our tax
deadline and conforming with governor
Murphy's executive order that allows us
to delay the collection of taxes you
know I do right I do depend on two of my
hotels and their hotel taxes and the
commercial property taxes and the
revenue part of it is what we we don't
know what's going to happen in the third
quarter but you know bigger towns in
Bergen County like myself Fort Lee we
are financially prepared for an
emergency like this we have different
mechanisms that we can use we can use
tax anticipation notes we can use bond
anticipation notes different things that
we can use to get us through the rest of
the year and reset right now we're not
looking at furloughs we're not looking
at layoffs we are in a strong position
but that doesn't mean that our bigger
cities are in that position the same
places like you know the largest cities
like Newark jersey city paterson that
expend on state aid to fill their budget
gaps so I think that the federal
government really needs to I've been
saying this for the last six weeks
really needs to move a lot faster they
should have opened up the spigots a lot
quicker you know on a local level on a
state level and on a county level that's
what we did as much as possible and we
restored confidence so this is why
people were able to shelter in place and
we were allowed you know we were able to
slow down the rate of infection and slow
down the rate of hospitalization so I
encourage you know Washington to do
what's right and make sure that they
come together and pass the stimulus of
stimulus packages for the local
municipalities that really need this
money so that they can move on with the
central services
yeah pally Villa I talked to Kevin
Hassett yeah go ahead bill go ahead yeah
I could anticipate where you're talking
with uh you know my colleague you know
Kevin has that you know this coming
Friday the jobs of course is gonna be
coming out it's gonna be a backward look
but still it's gonna be good information
for us and you know he was talking in an
interview a couple weeks ago that he was
thinking it's gonna be you know the
National is gonna be north of sixteen
seventeen percent my estimates are at
around 17 percent for New Jersey
I think ahran ahran upon a rate today is
around you know over 20 percent so as
the mayor said you know we you know we
really need the need Congress and the
administration to be much more
aggressive with with getting aids down
to the local level as you know Tip
O'Neill uses that all politics is local
well all economics are available what
happens mayor you have contingency plans
in place for what happens if that
shortfall comes in I mean you know from
the governor how a thirty billion dollar
shortfall affects Teaneck and whether
there are specific services because I
imagine
residents of Teaneck like residents
anywhere else in any state many states
across America that are going to have
massive shortfalls are expecting to hear
that things are going to change whether
that's garbage collection or policing or
emergency services we never I mean we
lived through this over the last we've
I've been in office for a decade and
after the last financial collapse and
after the last administration that was
in New Jersey we really learned not to
depend on state aid for our municipal
budgets the school board is a different
story because they get a lot more state
aid than the municipality does our
contingency plans and again are in place
we we don't expect to do layoffs we
don't expect to do furloughs again I'm a
bigger municipality where the second
largest municipality in Bergen County
where I I have a lot of levers to play
with but the smaller municipalities that
are dependent on state age like my
budget is a seventy seven million dollar
budget but a lot of
in Bergen County with you know are like
15 to 20 million dollars and you know
when you take a half a million dollar
hit it's very hard to make that money up
for them other than raising property
taxes how do you raise property taxes
with an unemployment rate of about
upwards of northern domini percent so
this is where again if my message is
clear is open up the spigot right and we
can fix this this is where the reserve
currency of the world I don't know why
they keeps making these things up
whenever we need to find money we can
find money right we'd find money for
words we find money for defense spending
we can't find money for the American
people you know and this is what you
really ticked me off is that when you
see in this country you see all these
people who are protesting and you see
you know the Trump Iran the magnet
movement or you see the Bernie movement
it's the same thing people don't trust
Washington any people don't think that
they care about us and you know time and
time again this is a third trauma that
this country has suffered in the last
two decades right and each time you
think that the institutions would learn
how to move quicker and how to take care
of the American people and we just saw
two weeks ago that the Federal Reserve
again gave a five hundred million dollar
loan guarantees to the Fortune 1000
companies again without any any
restrictions on layoffs and no
restrictions on executive bonuses right
they they did the workaround right they
couldn't get it through Congress and you
they kind of get it through the Senate
so they did the work so they did it
through the fattening yeah through the
Fed that's so at what point with no
oversight right so at what point do the
American people really look at this and
say you know Washington that really
doesn't care about us and that's why you
know you see people like Bernie Sanders
who are very popular and you see people
like Trump who are very popular yeah
it's it's that kind of well you know the
the statement that I mean the statement
that they're making is is that we want
an alternative because the usual
suspects don't care about us and that's
why I implore or both the Senate and the
Congress to get together and take care
of the American people I'm bill the
mayor makes a remarkable point
Stiglitz makes this point all the time
that the people who were supporting
Bernie Sanders and the people who
support Donald Trump share a view that
that others get what they don't get even
though they follow the rules they work
they go to school they try and get what
they need done this Federal Reserve
money that is going to the largest of
American companies without restrictions
on laying people off without
restrictions on executive compensation
without restrictions on stock buybacks
which by the way we saw a lot of last
week a lot of companies buying their
stock back it does do one the mayor says
it does piss people off it is remarkable
that somehow they can figure out how to
get the the financial services going the
the stock market had the best month it
has had in thirty three years and I
would imagine most Americans have had
the worst month that they have had in
thirty three years in April yeah and
sure and the the challenge that
Americans have been facing this is not
something that's just recent then is the
mayor just dead he connected the dots
that you know people feel bullied by
globalization people feel bullied by
technology and we've seen an erosion and
our social safety nets and we've seen
erosion and the ability of unions to
protect and can help create safe and
fair workplaces and so in and then we've
also been pulling back in terms of the
funding of the federal government or the
funding of government to be able to
respond and provide unemployment
insurance in a and I in a timely manner
there's the three T's when we look at
what's going on timely is it temporary
and is it targeted and you know the
Congress and the administration
especially the leadership within the
White House has really been you know
failing in that manner so you know again
I'm hopeful I'm honored to serve on this
commission with with with these other
members you know for their that have
national stature not only here in New
Jersey and one of the main points that
I'm hoping to bring to that conversation
is one about Alice where Alice stands
for asset limited income constraint
unemployed and we saw our Alice
population rise from thirty three
percent of households to over forty
about forty percent of household
during this expansion so what I take
away from that is that you know yes you
can grow the economy but if you don't
have those institutions that help to
create to help to create wealth in the
middle parts of the economy and the
lower parts of the economy you have a
major problem and coming home they're
bad metaphor but the bottom line is
we're seeing you know major major
upheaval because we haven't made those
investments in the past in our
communities guys thanks for joining me
this morning the mayor of Teaneck New
Jersey Mohammed Hamidah Dean former
chief economist of the US Labor
Department William Rogers thanks guys
hey there I'm Chris Hayes from MSNBC
thanks for watching MSNBC on YouTube if
you want to keep up to date with the
videos we're putting out you can click
subscribe just below me or click over on
this list to see lots of other great
videos